>> Ifill: COALITION FORCES
RETAKE A KEY ISLAMIC STATE
STRONGHOLD ON THE SYRIAN BORDER.
THE PRESIDENT'S SPECIAL ENVOY
GENERAL JOHN ALLEN ON U.S.
EFFORTS TO DEFEAT ISIS.
>> I THINK THE THE MOMENTUM IS
GROWING ACTUALLY ON THE THE PART
OF THE COALITION.
AS THESE FORCES CONTINUE TO
OPERATE, WE'RE GOING TO I CONTIE
TO MAKE THE POINT WITH THEM THAT
THEY HAVE TO PROTECT THE POP
LAIPGZS THAT THEY'RE LIBERATING.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
ALSO AHEAD THIS TUESDAY, THE
ECONOMICS OF FOOD WASTE, WHY
FARMERS LEAVE AS MUCH AS 30
PERCENT OF PRODUCE TO ROT IN THE
FIELD.
>> Ifill: SAY FAREWELL TO TRANS
FATS, FINDING HEALTHIER
ALTERNATIVES FOR THE ARTIFICIAL
INGREDIENT.
>> Woodruff: PLUS, AS CUBA
PREPARES TO OPEN UP TO THE U.S.,
PRESERVING HAVANA'S CHARACTER
FROM CRUMBLING INTO RUIN.
>> YOU SEE DECADES OF DEFERRED
MAINTENANCE, YOU SEE
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT'S FALLING
APART, CRACKED BUILDINGS, DIRT
CORROSION.
>> Ifill: THOSE ARE SOME OF THE
STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS "NEWSHOUR."
>> Ifill: U.S. AIRSTRIKES IN
YEMEN HAVE KILLED AL-QAEDA
CHIEF, NASSER AL-WUHAYSHI,
REMOVING THE LEADER OF ITS
OFFSHOOT IN THE ARABIAN
PENINSULA.
THE WHITE HOUSE ANNOUNCED THAT
NEWS TODAY.
AND THE MILITANT GROUP CONFIRMED
IT, IN A VIDEO STATEMENT POSTED
ONLINE.
WUHEESHI WAS KNOWN AS AL-QAEDA'S
CHARISMATIC SECOND-IN-COMMAND,
AND A CLOSE ASSOCIATE OF OSAMA
BIN LADEN IN THE YEARS LEADING
UP TO THE 9/11 ATTACKS.
EARLIER TODAY JUDY SPOKE WITH
RETIRED MARINE GENERAL JOHN
ALLEN, THE PRESIDENT'S POINT
PERSON FOR THE COALITION
FIGHTING THE ISLAMIC STATE,
ABOUT THE STRIKE ON THE RIVAL
MILITANT GROUP.
>> IT'S A BLOW TO AL QAEDA AS
THE NUMBER TWO IN AL QAEDA.
IT JUST CONTINUES TO REINFORCE
THE POINT THAT AL QAEDA
LEADERSHIP WILL BE AT RISK NO
MATTER WHERE THEY ARE ON THE
PLANET, THAT THE UNITED STATES
IS GOING TO HUNT YOU DOWN AND
WE'RE GOING TO DEAL WITH YOU.
>> Ifill: JUDY'S COMPLETE
INTERVIEW WITH GENERAL ALLEN
WILL RUN LATER IN THE BROADCAST.
FOR MORE DETAILS OF THE SLAIN AL
QAEDA LEADER, I SPOKE EARLIER
WITH FORMER DEPUTY NATIONAL
SECURITY ADVISER FOR COMBATING
TERRORISM, JUAN ZARATE.
WELCOME BACK, JUAN ZARATE.
>> THANK YOU, GWEN.
>> Ifill: WHAT DOES THE DEATH
OF NASSER AL-WUHAYSHI TELL US
ABOUT AL QAEDA?
>> AL QAEDA REMAINS UNDER
PRESSURE AND IS HAVING A TOUGH
TIME REMAINING THE VANGUARD OF
THE GLOBAL EXTREMIST MOVEMENT.
WUHAYSHI WAS ONE OF THE
SENIOR-MOST AND LONG-STANDING
LEADERS OF AL QAEDA, AL QAEDA'S
NUMBER TWO WORLDWIDE, WAS
LEADING AL QAEDA IN THE ARABIAN
PENINSULA.
THIS IS A SIGNIFICANT BLOW.
THAT SAID, AL QAEDA IN THE
ARABIAN PENINSULA ITSELF IS MUCH
STRONGER THAN IT HAS BEEN, HAS
MORE MANPOWER, MORE FUNDS,
ESTABLISHED A SAFE SAFEN.
AL QAEDA IN SOME WAYS, STILL
PRESENTS A THREAT.
PUT THE REMOVAL OF WUHAYSHI, WHO
PRESENTS AN ELEMENT OF
CONNECTIVITY FOR THE GROUP
GLOBALLY IS REALLY A BLOW TO THE
ATTEMPTS BY AL QAEDA TO REMAIN
THE VANGUARD OF THIS GLOBAL
MOVEMENT.
>> Ifill: AL QAEDA IS SO
HYDROHEADD AND WE'VE SEEN THE
RISE OF ISIS IN RECENT YEARS,
DOES THIS MEAN-- AND THERE HAVE
BEEN A STRING OF ATTACKS THIS
SEEM TO HAVE TAKEN OUT PEOPLE
WHO ARE NUMBER ONE OR TWO IN
DIFFERENT AREAS OF THE REGION.
DOES THIS MEAN AL QAEDA IS ON
ITS WAY OUT, ON ITS HEELS, OR IS
THAT TOO MUCH TO HOPE FOR?
>> I THINK IT'S TOO MUCH TO HOPE
FOR.
UNFORTUNATELY, THIS IS A
MOVEMENT THAT HAS METASTASIZED
AROUND THE WORLD SO YOU HAVE HAD
THIS GROUP IN 'EM, AL QAEDA, THE
IRAQIIAN PENINSULA, IN AFRICA,
EAST AFRICA AIR, MOVEMENT THAT
HAS INSPIRED OTHERS TO ATTACK.
KEEP MIND, AL QAEDA IN THE
ARABIAN PENINSULA TOOK CREDIT
FOR THE CHARLIE HEBDO, THE PARIS
ATTACKS SO IN SOME WAYS THE
IDEOLOGY ITSELF HAS SPAWNED THIS
GLOBAL MOVEMENT AND IT'S NOT
GOOD ENOUGH NOW AT THIS STAGE TO
SIMPLY REMOVE A LEADER, ALTHOUGH
HE HAS BEEN INCREDIBLY IMPORTANT
AND SIGNIFICANT SO WE'RE STILL
GOING TO SEE A THREAT FROM THIS
GROUP AS IT ADAPTS TO THE
PRESSURE.
>> Ifill: DOES SUCCESS MEAN WE
HAVE SOURCES FROM WITHIN HELPING
US TO FIND THESE LEADERS?
>> THAT'S A AGREEDUES QTION,
GWEN, BECAUSE THE U.S. HAS HAD
TO ADVOCATE ITS PRESENCE IN
YEMEN.
IT HAS HAD TO FIGHT OTHER FIGHTS
ASID THE CIVIL WAR IN YEMEN.
BUT WE CONTINUE TO HAVE EYES AND
EARS ALLOWING US TO TARGET THESE
KIND OF INDIVIDUAL.
AND AS THE WHITE HOUSE HAS SAID
NAY WILL TAKE STRIKES
UNILATERALLY AGAINST THOSE
PLOTTING AGAINST THE U.S. AND
WUHAYSHI FIT THAT BILL.
>> Sreenivasan: WHEN OSAMA BIN
LADEN WAS TAKEN OUT, THERE WERE
OTHEROTHERS WHO ROSE TO REPLACE.
IS THAT THE CASE HERE AS WELL?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
THE SUCCESSOR IN WAITING, THE
MILITANT COMMANDER OF A.Q.A.P.,
SO A.Q.A.P. IS NOT GOING TO
REALLY MISS A BEAT AND THEY'RE
GOING TO REMAIN FOCUSED NOT JUST
ON ESTABLISHING A SAFE HAVEN IN
YEMEN BUT ALSO ATTACKING THE
WEST.
AND I THINK THAT'S THE REALITY
OF A MOVEMENT THAT HAS ENDURED
THESE KINDS OF DECAPITATIONS
OVER TIME.
THEY KNOW THAT THE SUCCESSION
WILL COME.
IT WILL BE INTERESTING, THOUGH,
GWEN, WHO SEE WHO BOTTOMS THE
AL QAEDA DEPUTY GLOBALLY.
WE HAVEN'T HEARD SOME
AL-ZAWAHIRI YET.
>> Ifill: JUAN ZARATE, AS
ALWAYS, THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU, GWEN.
>> Ifill: AS WE JUST MENTIONED,
THE KILLING OF THE AL QAEDA
LEADER IN YEMEN COMES AGAINST
THE BACKDROP OF HEAVY FIGHTING
IN THE COUNTRY SINCE MARCH, THAT
HAS CLAIMED THOUSANDS OF LIVES.
TODAY, REPRESENTATIVES FOR THE
HOUTHI REBEL DELEGATION FINALLY
ARRIVED FOR U.N. LED PEACE TALKS
IN GENEVA, BUT RIVAL FACTIONS
REFUSED TO SIT IN THE SAME ROOM.
THE U.N. IS HOPING TO AT LEAST
ESTABLISH A CEASE-FIRE WHEN
RAMADAN BEGINS LATER THIS WEEK.
JOURNALIST JANE FERGUSON IS IN
YEMEN ON ASSIGNMENT FOR THE
NEWSHOUR.
SHE TOLD US EARLIER TODAY THAT
MANY ON THE GROUND AREN'T
COUNTING ON A DIPLOMATIC
BREAKTHROUGH.
>> Reporter: EVERY DAY AND
NIGHT, THE SOUND OF STRIKES AND
ANTI AIRCRAFT GUNFIRE CAN BE
HEARD ACROSS SANAA.
NEITHER SIDE WANTS TO BE SEEN TO
HAVE BACKED DOWN AND SEVERAL
MONTHS OF VIOLENCE HAS HARDENED
EACH SIDE'S POSITION.
IN THE MEANTIME, LIFE FOR
YEMENIS IS A CONSTANT STRUGGLE.
A SAUDI IMPOSED BLOCKADE ON THE
COUNTRY HAS MADE ESSENTIALS
SCARCE: FAMILIES ARE LIVING ON
SMALL SUPPLIES OF RATIONED
WATER, PEOPLE SIT IN THEIR CARS
FOR SEVERAL DAYS AS THEY WAIT IN
LINE FOR GAS AND HOSPITALS SAY
THEY'RE RUNNING OUT OF ESSENTIAL
SUPPLIES.
YEMEN HAS LONG BEEN THE POOREST
COUNTRY IN THE MIDDLE EAST, BUT
THIS RECENT CRISIS IS CREATING A
HUMANITARIAN DISASTER WORSE THAN
EVER BEFORE.
>> Ifill: YOU CAN WATCH JANE
FERGUSON'S FULL REPORT FROM
YEMEN ON THE NEWSHOUR LATER THIS
WEEK.
MAHMOUD ABBAS ANNOUNCED THE
GOVERNMENT HE FORMED WITH RIFLE
HAMAS LAST YEAR WILL DISSOLVE.
THIS NEWS COMES IN THE WAKE OF
LAST YEAR'S WAR IN GAZA AND
FRUSTRATIONS OVER POLITICAL
POWER SHAIRLG THERE.
>> Woodruff: IN THE DAY'S OTHER
NEWS, THE U.S. HOUSE GAVE ITSELF
MORE TIME TO SALVAGE PRESIDENT
OBAMA'S TRADE AGENDA.
REPUBLICANS PUSHED THROUGH A
MEASURE TO KEEP THE ISSUE ALIVE
THROUGH JULY.
LAST FRIDAY, DEMOCRATS
EFFECTIVELY BLOCKED THE
PRESIDENT'S BID FOR RENEWED
NEGOTIATING AUTHORITY.
THAT OUTCOME JEOPARDIZED A
PROPOSED ASIAN TRADE AGREEMENT.
>> Ifill: ALSO TODAY, LAWMAKERS
RIPPED INTO THE FEDERAL
PERSONNEL CHIEF, OVER TWO MAJOR
DATA BREACHES.
THE ATTACKS EXPOSED INFORMATION
ON MILLIONS OF CURRENT, FORMER
AND PROSPECTIVE GOVERNMENT
EMPLOYEES.
AT A HOUSE HEARING, KATHERINE
ARCHULETA BLAMED DECADES OF
NEGLECT OF GOVERNMENT COMPUTER
SYSTEMS.
BUT UTAH REPUBLICAN JASON
CHAFFETZ POINTED TO AN INSPECTOR
GENERAL'S WARNING LAST YEAR.
>> YOUR SYSTEM WERE VULNERABLE,
THE DATA WAS-- WAS NOT
ENCRYPTED.
IT COULD BE COMPROMISED.
THEY WERE RIGHT LAST YEAR.
THEY RECOMMENDED IT WAS SO BAD
THAT YOU SHUT IT DOWN, AND YOU
DIDN'T, AND I WANT TO KNOW WHY.
>> THE RECOMMENDATION TO CLOSE
DOWN OUR SYSTEMS CAME AFTER THE
ADVERSARIES WERE ALREADY IN OUR
NETWORK.
>> WHEN DIDTHEY GET IN THE
NETWORK--
>> OUR SECURITY SYSTEM SYSTEMS E
WERE ABLE TO DETECT THIS
INTRUSION.
>> Ifill: IT'S BEEN WIDELY
REPORTED THAT U.S. OFFICIALS
BELIEVE THE CYBER-ATTACKS ARE
LINKED TO CHINA, A CHARGE
BEIJING DENIES.
>> Woodruff: THERE'S WORD THE
F.B.I. IS INVESTIGATING
PRO BASEBALL'S ST. LOUIS
CARDINALS FOR ALLEGEDLY HACKING
THE HOUSTON ASTROS' COMPUTERS.
"THE NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTS THE
TARGET WAS INFORMATION ON
PLAYERS, INCLUDING TRADES AND
SCOUTING REPORTS.
THE CARDINALS SAID THEY'RE
COOPERATING WITH THE PROBE.
>> Ifill: TROPICAL STORM "BILL"
SOCKED TEXAS TODAY, JUST WEEKS
AFTER FLOODS KILLED MORE THAN 30
PEOPLE IN THE STATE.
THE STORM MADE LANDFALL AT
MIDDAY NEAR MATAGORDA WITH WINDS
OF 60 MILES AN HOUR.
AS IT ROARED ASHORE, IT ALSO
BROUGHT HEAVY DOWNPOURS, WITH UP
TO A FOOT OF RAIN EXPECTED.
FLASH FLOOD WATCHES WERE POSTED
IN CENTRAL TEXAS AND THE HOUSTON
AREA.
>> Woodruff: THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION HAS UNVEILED $4
BILLION IN PRIVATE SECTOR
PLEDGES TO TARGET CLIMATE
CHANGE.
THE ANNOUNCEMENT CAME AT A WHITE
HOUSE SUMMIT TODAY.
MAJOR FOUNDATIONS AND CORPORATE
INVESTORS COMMITTED TO PAY FOR
INNOVATIVE WAYS OF CUTTING
CARBON POLLUTION.
>> Ifill: A MAN WHO LEAPED THE
WHITE HOUSE FENCE AND GOT INSIDE
THE EXECUTIVE MANSION WAS
SENTENCED TODAY.
A FEDERAL JUDGE ORDERED OMAR
GONZALEZ TO SERVE 17 MONTHS IN
PRISON.
THE IRAQ WAR VETERAN WAS CAUGHT
ON CAMERA IN SEPTEMBER, RUNNING
ACROSS THE WHITE HOUSE LAWN.
HE WAS EVENTUALLY TACKLED INSIDE
THE BUILDING.
THE INCIDENT HELPED FORCE A
SHAKEUP AT THE SECRET SERVICE.
>> Woodruff: REAL ESTATE MOGUL
DONALD TRUMP MADE IT AN EVEN
DOZEN TODAY IN THE REPUBLICAN
PRESIDENTIAL FIELD.
THE FLAMBOYANT BILLIONAIRE AND
T.V. PERSONALITY ANNOUNCED AT
HIS TRUMP TOWER SKYSCRAPER IN
NEW YORK CITY.
HE VOWED TO TACKLE A LITANY OF
ISSUES, FROM HEALTH CARE TO
IMMIGRATION.
>> I WOULD REPEAL AND REPLACE
THE BIG LIE OBAMACARE, I WOULD
BUILD A GREAT WALL, AND NOBODY
BUILDS WALLS BETTER THAN ME
BELIEVE ME AND I'LL BUILD THEM
VERY INEXPENSIVELY, I WILL BUILD
A GREAT, GREAT WALL ON OUR
SOUTHERN BORDER AND I WILL HAVE
MEXICO PAY FOR THAT WALL MARK MY
WORDS.
>> Woodruff: SO FAR, TRUMP HAS
PLACED NEAR THE BOTTOM IN PUBLIC
OPINION POLLS ON THE REPUBLICAN
PRESIDENTIAL HOPEFULS.
>> Ifill: GREECE AND THE
EUROPEAN UNION HARDENED THEIR
POSITIONS TODAY IN A STANDOFF
OVER PREVENTING FINANCIAL
DEFAULT.
IN ATHENS, PRIME MINISTER ALEXIS
TSIPRAS TOLD PARLIAMENT EUROPEAN
CREDITORS WANT HIGHER TAXES,
INCLUDING ON MEDICINE AND
ELECTRICITY.
ELECTRICITY. >> (
translated): IF THE GOAL
>> (translated): IF THE
GOAL IS TO CONTINUE WITH A
PROGRAM
IS TO CONTINUE WITH A PROGRAM
THAT EVERYONE IN THE WORLD KNOWS
HAS FAILED, AND WITHOUT ANY DEBT
RESTRUCTURING, THEN THERE IS NO
LEEWAY FOR A DECISION BY THE
GREEK PARLIAMENT.
WE ARE OBLIGED, TO JUST DO OUR
DUTY, TO NOT GIVE IN TO
PRESSURES AND BLACKMAILS WITHOUT
ANY RESULT.
>> Ifill: THE HEAD OF THE
EUROPEAN COMMISSION SAID THE
PRIME MINISTER ISN'T TELLING THE
TRUTH.
WITHOUT AN AGREEMENT, GREECE
COULD DEFAULT ON A REPAYMENT OF
$1.8 BILLION THAT'S DUE AT
MONTH'S END.
>> Woodruff: AMERICANS ARE
GIVING MORE TO CHARITIES AFTER A
LONG, POST-RECESSION SLUMP.
THE FOUNDATION, "GIVING U.S.A."
REPORTS AN ESTIMATED $358
BILLION WENT TO U.S. CHARITIES
LAST YEAR.
THAT WAS $47 BILLION MORE THAN
THE RECORD SET IN 2007, BEFORE
THE RECESSION.
>> Ifill: WALL STREET DIDN'T SET
ANY RECORDS TODAY, BUT IT DID
MANAGE TO BREAK A LOSING STREAK.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 113 POINTS TO CLOSE ABOVE
17,900.
THE NASDAQ ROSE
25 POINTS, AND THE S-AND-P 500
ADDED NEARLY 12
>> Woodruff: IN A PASSING OF
NOTE, LAS VEGAS CASINO
BILLIONAIRE KIRK KERKORIAN DIED
LAST NIGHT IN LOS ANGELES, AFTER
A BRIEF ILLNESS.
HE BUILT SOME OF THE BIGGEST
HOTELS IN LAS VEGAS AND BOUGHT
AND SOLD THE M.G.M. MOVIE STUDIO
THREE TIMES.
HE ALSO TRIED AND FAILED, TWICE,
TO BUY CHRYSLER.
KIRK KERKORIAN WAS 98 YEARS OLD.
>> Ifill: AND THE CHICAGO
BLACKHAWKS CELEBRATED TODAY,
AFTER WINNING THE STANLEY CUP
LAST NIGHT.
THE BLACKHAWKS BEAT THE TAMPA
BAY LIGHTNING 2-0 IN GAME 6 OF
THE NATIONAL HOCKEY LEAGUE
FINALS.
IT'S CHICAGO'S THIRD TITLE IN 6
YEARS.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR:
GENERAL JOHN ALLEN ON BUILDING A
COALITION TO DEFEAT ISLAMIC
STATE MILITANTS;
WHAT PHASING OUT TRANS FATS
MEANS FOR FOOD PRODUCERS AND
CONSUMERS;
ECONOMIC INCENTIVES TO STOP FOOD
FROM GOING TO WASTE;
SAVING CUBA'S ARCHITECTURE FROM
TURNING TO RUINS;
AND, ONE STUDENT'S FIGHT TO BEAT
THE ODDS AND BECOME THE FIRST IN
HER FAMILY TO GRADUATE HIGH
SCHOOL.
>> Woodruff: THE ISLAMIC STATE
GROUP SUFFERED A MAJOR DEFEAT IN
THE LAST 24 HOURS, LOSING A
VITAL SUPPLY LINE TO ITS SELF-
PROCLAIMED CAPITAL RAQQA.
THE ISIS LOSS HAPPENED INSIDE
SYRIA NEAR THE TURKISH BORDER IN
A TOWN CALLED TAL ABYAD.
KURDISH FIGHTERS, AND MEMBERS OF
THE FREE SYRIAN ARMY TOOK
CONTROL OF THE AREA AFTER DAYS
OF FIGHTING.
THEY WERE HELPED BY THREE U.S.
COALITION AIRSTRIKES ON ISLAMIC
STATE TARGETS.
THE DEVELOPMENT COMES ON THE
HEELSF TH OE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION'S ANNOUNCEMENT
THAT IT IS SENDING AN ADDITIONAL
450 TRAINERS TO IRAQ TO FIGHT
THE SUNNI MILITANT GROUP.
HELPING COORDINATE EFFORTS WITH
ALLIES AGAINST THE ISLAMIC STATE
IS RETIRED MARINE GENERAL JOHN
ALLEN, THE PRESIDENT'S SPECIAL
ENVOY.
I SPOKE TO HIM EARLIER TODAY AT
THE STATE DEPARTMENT, AS PART OF
OUR SERIES "NO END IN SIGHT."
GENERAL JOHN ALLEN, THANK YOU
VERY MUCH FOR TALKING WITH US.
>> IT'S ALWAYS A PLEASURE, JUDY.
THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: SO YOU'VE JUST
COME BACK FROM A TRIP TO IRAQ
AND A NUMBER OF OTHER COUNTRIES.
THE NEWS LATELY ABOUT ISIS HAS
BEEN PRETTY DISAPPOINTING-- IN
FACT, DISCOURAGING.
BUT THERE WAS SOME GOOD NEWS
YESTERDAY OUT OF SYRIA AND A
BABLGTHS ROUTE ON THE TURKISH
BORDER.
WHAT YOU CAN TELL BUS THAT?
>> WELL, THE REPORTING IS STILL
COMING TOGETHER ON THIS, JUDY.
IT'S A LONG-TERM EFFORT THAT'S
BEEN UNDER WAY BY SOME OF THE
RESISTANCE ELEMENTS IN THAT
REGION TO ULTIMATELY CUT OFF A
BORDER CROSSING CALLED TAL
ABYAD.
AND WE BELIEVE IT IS ONE OF THE
PRINCIPAL SOURCES FOR SUPPLY TO
ISIL'S CAPITAL IN RAQQA TO THE
SOUTH.
SO WE'RE WAITING TO GET MORE
REPORTING ON IT.
WE'LL GET MORE OVER THE NEXT FEW
DAYS AND GET A BETTER AND A
CLEARER PICTURE.
BUT ONE THING THAT'S VERY
IMPORTANT, I THINK, AS THESE
FORCES CONTINUE TO OPERATE,
WE'RE GOING TO CONTINUE TO MAKE
THE POINT WITH THEM THAT THEY
HAVE TO PROTECT THE POPULATIONS
THAT THEY'RE LIBERATING.
IT'S ESSENTIAL, REALLY, TO THE
STABILIZATION OF THE AREA.
SO WE'RE GOING TO WATCH THAT AS
WELL.
>> Woodruff: BUT AS WE WERE
SAYING OVERALL THE NEWS HAS BEEN
PRETTY DISCOURAGING.
THE FALL OF RAHM.
THE LAST STRONGHOLD ESSENTIALLY
OF THE IRAQI GOVERNMENT IN ANBAR
PROVINCE, AND THE FACT THAT ISIS
HAS BEEN ABLE TO NOT JUST TAKE
BUT HOLD LARGE SWATHS OF
TERRITORY IN SYRIA.
IN IRAQ WE'RE A YEAR OUT FROM
ISIS TAKING OVER MOSUL.
I MEAN, WHAT-- WHO HAS THE UPPER
HAND RIGHT NOW IN THIS CONFLICT?
>> WELL,IC I THINK THE MOMENTUM
IS GROWING, ACTUALLY, ON THE
PART OF THE COALITION, THE
IRAQIS.
IF YOU LOOK AT THE BATTLE SPACE
ACROSS IRAQ, TIKRIT WAS RECENTLY
LIBERATED, WHICH IS NOT AN
INSIGNIFICANT CITY, FRANKLY.
AND VERY IMPORTANT ACTIVITY IS
GOING ON IN TIKRIT TODAY.
IN THE PROVINCE OF SALASES HAD
ADDIN, STARTING YESTERDAY,
FAMILIES BEGAN TO RETURN TO
TIKRIT AFTER IT WAS LIBERATED.
THERE HAS BEEN THE BEGINNINGS OF
THE RECOVERY OF THE SUNNI IRAQI
POLICE OF THAT PROVINCE, WHICH
WILL BE CENSUS TO SECURING AND
HOLDING THAT POPULATION.
IT'S NOT JUST BEATING DASH.
IT'S ULTIMATELY MOVING THE
POPULATIONS BACK INTO THEIR HOME
VILLAGES OR IN THIS CASE THE
CITY AND DOING THAT IN A WAY
WHERE WE CAN SECURE THE
POPULATION THROUGH THE RECOVERED
POLICE AND DOING IT IN A WAY
WHERE WE CAN PROVIDE
STABILIZATION TO THE POPULATION
BY THE MOVEMENT OF FUNDS CREATED
AS A RESULT OF THE COALITION.
THAT'S A PRETTY IMPORTANT
OUTCOME.
AND THAT PROCESS IS UNDER WAY IN
A NUMBER OF PLACES IN IRAQ.
>> Woodruff: NOW THE PRESIDENT
JUST ANNOUNCED AT THE END OF
LAST WEEK THAT 450 MORE U.S.
MILITARY ADVISERS, TRAINERS,
WILL BE GOING TO IRAQ SOON TO
BEEF UP THE U.S. PRESENCE THERE
NOW, TO WORK IN ANBAR PROVINCE.
HOW MUCH DIFFERENCE IS THAT
GOING TO MAKE?
>> WHAT YOU SAW WITH THE DEFEAT
IN RAMADI-- AND WE LEARNED A LOT
ABOUT THAT-- WAS THAT IN THE
END, WHILE THOSE DEFENDERS
FOUGHT HARD FOR A LONG PERIOD OF
TIME AND ULTIMATELY WITHDREW, IF
YOU GO UP THE RIVER JUST A SHORT
DISTANCE TO AL-ASSAD, AN
OPERATIONAL PLATFORM WHERE WE'VE
BEEN FOR A LONG PERIOD OF TIME,
THE TRAINING OF IRAQI SECURITY
FORCES AND THE TRAINING OF
TRIBAL FORCES HAS RENDERED A BIG
SEGMENT OF THE EUPHRATES RIVER
COMPLETELY EMPTY OF DASH.
THERE IS THE PROOF OF THE
CONCEPT BEHIND THE STRATEGY OF
ULTIMATELY EMPOWERING THE
INDIGENOUS FORCES TO TAKE
CONTROL OF THEIR AREAS.
WHAT ALTATUATTAM GIVES THE THE
POTENTIAL TO REALLY IN ONE
PLACE, ULTIMATELY TO BE TRAINED
BY AMERICANS AND IRAQIS TO GIVE
THEM THE CAPACITY TO TAKE BACK
THE EASTERN PART OF THE PROVINCE
PROVINCE.
>> Woodruff: ONE OF THE VIEWS
THROUGHOUT IS THAT THE U.S.
SHOULD BE DOING MUCH MORE THAN
THIS.
IF IT'S WORTH DOING ANYTHING,
IT'S WORTH COMING IN WITH
OVERWHELMING SUPPORT, THAT THIS
IS TAKING TOO LONG, THAT ISIS IS
GET TOO LONG LASTING AND DEEP A
FOOTHOLD, AND THE U.S. SHOULDN'T
BE MAKING SUCH A BABY STEP, IF
YOU WILL.
>> I THINK THE U.S. IS DOING A
GREAT DEAL.
AND LET'S CALL IT THE COALITION
AS WELL.
I THINK WE'RE DOING A GREAT
DEAL.
BEYOND THE CLEARANCE OF TIKRIT,
WHICH WOULD NOT HAVE HAPPENED,
FRANKLY, WITHOUT COALITION
SUPPORT TO THE IRAQI SECURITY
FORCES.
WITHOUT OUR EMPHASIS ON RECOVERY
OF THE POLICE AND LINING UP
COALITION PARTNERS TO HELP TO
TRAIN THE POLICE, WITHOUT GOING
AFTER ACTIVELY THE DEVELOPMENT
OF A SUSTAINABILITY OR A
STABILIZATION FUND, WITHOUT OUR
CONSTANT TRAINING OF IRAQI MAIN
FORCE UNITS AND TRIBAL ELEMENTS
WE WOULDN'T BE WHERE WE ARE
TODAY.
SO THERE'S A LOT OF ACTIVITY
THAT'S GOING ON.
>> Woodruff: ANOTHER VIEW IS
THAT THIS IS JUST TURNING OUT TO
BE TOO HARD.
IT'S NOT GOING TO WORK.
AND THE U.S. SHOULD JUST
BASICALLY PULL BACK AND LET--
LEAVE THE FIGHT TO THE KURDS,
THE IRANIANS, ANYONE ELSE IN THE
REGION.
>> WELL, THAT'S NOT GOING TO
WORK.
I MEAN IT COMPLETELY
DESTABILIZES THE REGION IF WE
PERMIT IRAQ TO ULTIMATELY COME
APART, AND THE CHANCES ARE VERY
GOOD THAT WEEK THE CASE WITHOUT
THE SUPPORT WE'RE PROVIDING TO
THE PRIME MINISTER AT THIS
PARTICULAR MOMENT.
IT'S NOT GOING TO OCCUR IN THE
SHORT TERM.
IT'S GOING TO TAKE HAD?
TIME AND WE NEED TO RECOGNIZE
THAT.
>> Woodruff: GENERAL ALLEN,
YOU HAVE BEEN VERY FOCUSED ON
THE FLOOD OF FOREIGN FIGHTERS
INTO THE REGION TO WORK WITH--
FIGHT WITH ISIS.
YOU WERE NOT ONLY IN IRAQ.
YOU MADE A TRIP TO THE BALKAN
COUNTRIES -- CROATIA, BOZ ME
AHERZEGOVINA, MONTENEGRO,
BECAUSE OF THE CONCERN ABOUT THE
SOURCE, FOREIGN FIGHTERS THERE.
TALK A LITTLE BIT ABOUT WHAT
YOUR MESSAGE WAS THERE AND HOW
SERIOUS THIS PROBLEM IS.
>> EVERYONE OF THOSE COUNTRIES
IS, IN FACT, A SOURCE COUNTRY.
BUT WE'RE ALSO A SOURCE COUNTRY,
AND WE'RE LOOKING VERY HARD AT
HOW WE GET AT THE BUSINESS OF
REDUCING THE ATTRACTIVENESS OF
THE CALIPHATE, WHICH IS OFTEN
THE SO-CALLED-- SO-CALLED
CALIPHATE, @WHICH IS OFTEN THE
POINT OF LEGITIMATIZATION FOR
THE MESSAGE OF DASH, SO THEY'RE
BRACING THAT HARD AND WE CAN
LEARN A LOT FROM WHAT WE'RE
TRYING TO DO.
>> Woodruff: THERE WAS A STORY
IN THE "WASHINGTON POST" OVER
THE LAST FEW DAYS ESSENTIALLY
SAYING THE U.S. IS LOSING THE
BATTLE IN SOCIAL MEDIA TO WIN
HEARTS AND MINDS, THAT ISIS HAS
BEEN SO EFFECTIVE IN GETTING ITS
MESSAGE OUT THERE AND MAKING IT
SEEM SO APPEALING, AND THAT THE
U.S. AND THE COALITION HAS HAD A
MUCH TOUGHER TIME.
WHERE DOES THAT STAND?
AND DO YOU--
>> THAT'S A GREAT QUESTION.
>> Woodruff: WHY IS IT SO
HARD?
>> IT'S HARD FOR A VARIETY OF
REASONS.
FIRST, I DON'T AGREE WITH THE
BROAD CHARACTER ESTIMATION THAT
WE'RE LOSING THE CONFLICT IN
THAT REGARD.
IT'S A GREAT CHALLENGE BECAUSE
DASH ONLY HAS ONE MESSAGE, AND
THEY ONLY HAVE A SINGLE ENTITY,
BY AND LARGE, THAT'S PUTTING
THAT MENG OUT.
SO IT'S EASY TO GET A UNITY OF
AND WERE A UNITY OF EFFORT IN
THAT MESSAGE.
BUT I RECALL THE WORDS OF ONE OF
OUR COALITION LEADERS, AND
THAT'S KING ADBULLAH II OF
JORDAN WHERE HE SAID THIS IS
ABOUT RECOVERING OUR FAITH.
AND TO DO THIS, WE MUST HAVE AN
ARAB FACE AND A MUSLIM VOICE.
AND I'VE TRAVELED A LOT, JUDY,
ACROSS THE COALITION.
I'VE BEEN TO 29 DIFFERENT
CAPITALS AT THIS POINT.
I'VE BEEN TO SOUTHEAST ASIA.
I'VE BEEN TO THE MIDDLE EAST.
I'VE BEEN IN EUROPE, I'VE BEEN
IN NORTH AMERICA.
SO WITH THAT MUCH DIVERSITY
ACROSS SO MANY REGIONS IN THE
WORLD ACHIEVING THE UNITY OF
PURPOSE AND THE UNITY OF MESSAGE
IS REALLY IMPORTANT AND THAT'S
WHAT WE'RE WORKING TO DO.
>> Woodruff: GENERAL JOHN
ALLEN, WE THANK YOU VERY MUCH
FOR TALKING WITH US.
>> IT'S GREAT TO SEE YOU AGAIN,
JUDY.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Ifill: IN HEALTH NEWS TODAY,
THE FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION
MOVED TO EFFECTIVELY BAN
ARTIFICIAL TRANS FATS.
DECLARING THAT PARTIALLY
HYDROGENATED OILS, KNOWN AS
P.H.O.'S, AND THE MAIN SOURCE OF
ARTIFICIAL TRANS FATS ARE UNSAFE
FOR USE IN HUMAN FOOD.
FOOD MANUFACTURERS HAVE THREE
YEARS TO GET RID OF THE P.H.O's.
A MOVE THE F.D.A. SAID COULD
PREVENT THOUSANDS OF FATAL HEART
ATTACKS EACH YEAR.
FOR MORE ON TODAY'S
ANNOUNCEMENT, WE TURN TO DR.
WALTER WILLETT, CHAIRMAN OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF NUTRITION AT
HARVARD UNIVERSITY'S T.H. CHAN
SCHOOL OF PUBLIC HEALTH
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US,
DR. WILLETT.
IF YOU COULD PLEASE START BY
EXPLAINING FOR PEOPLE WHO DON'T
UNDERSTAND, WHERE DO THEY FIND--
WHERE DO YOU SEE TRANS FAT?
>> TRANS FATS HAVE BEEN WIDELY
USED IN THE FOOD SUPPLY AS A
SUBSTITUTE FOR LARD AND BUTTER.
WE FOUND THEM IN SHORTENING,
MARGARINE, BAKED GOODS,
DEEP-FRIED PRODUCTS.
ABOUT 80% OR 85% OF TRANS FATS
HAVE BEEN REMOVED FROM THE FOOD
SUPPLY AT THIS TIME.
>> Ifill: IF THE F.D.A. JUST
TODAY SAID THEY WERE BAND AND WE
ALREADY LOST 80% OF TRANS FATS
IN THE FOOD SUPPLY SINCE 2003
WHAT, IS THE NEED FOR THIS FULL
BAN NOW?
>> EVEN THE RELATIVELY SMALL
AMOUNT OF TRANS FATS REMAINING
ARE STILL LIKELY TO BE CAUSING
AROUND 7,000 PREMATURE DEATHS
FROM HEART DISEASE PER YEAR.
THAT'S STILL A LARGE NUMBER AND
DEFINITELY WORTH THE BAN TAKING
EFFECT TO REALLY GET TRANS FAT
OFF THE TABLE ENTIRELY.
>> Ifill: WHY ISN'T SIMPLY
LABELING THE FOOD NOT SUFFICIENT
SO PEOPLE CAN DECIDE IF THAT'S
SOMETHING THEY WANT TO CONSUME
OR NOT?
>> THE PROBLEM IS THAT MANY
FOODS DON'T HAVE LABELS ON THEM.
WHEN WE WERE ABLE TO PUT TRANS
FAT ON THE FOOD LABEL FOR THOSE
FOODS THAT DO HAVE A LABEL, THE
MANUFACTURERS QUICKLY REMOVED
TRANS FATS FROM MOST OF THOSE
PRODUCTS, BUT THEY KEPT SELLING
TRANS FATS IN RESTAURANTS WHERE
THERE ARE NO FOOD LABELS
UPROVIDING QUITE CLEAR EVIDENCE
THAT JUST LABELING ALONE WAS
VERY IMPORTANT BUT IT'S NOT A
SUFFICIENT WAY OF GETTING TRANS
FATS OUT OF THE FOOD SUPPLY.
>> Ifill: SO PREPARED FOODS
ARE A DANGER ZONE.
BUT EXPLAIN TO ME THE HEALTH
CONNECTION.
YOU SAID AND THE F.D.A. SAID
THOUSANDS OF HEART ATTACKS WOULD
BE PREVENTED BECAUSE OF THIS
KIND OF RULING.
WHAT IS THE CONNECTION?
>> THERE ARE MANY KINDS OF
STUDIES THAT HAVE LOOKED AT
TRANS FAT.
IN SHORT-TERM FEEDING STUDY WE
SEE TRANS FATS INCREASE L.D.L.,
THE BAD CHOLESTEROL, REDUCE
H.D.L.-- THE GOOD CHOLESTEROL--
INCREASE INFLAMMATORY FACTORS
AND HAVE MANY OTHER ADVERSE
METABOLIC EFFECTS.
IN LONG-TERM EPIDEMIOLOGIC
STUDIES WE SEE CLEAR EVIDENCE
THAT HIGHER INTAKE OF TRANS FATS
IS ASSOCIATED WITH HIGHER RISK
OF HEART DISEASE DISOOEZ.
IN MORE RECENT STUDIES WITH MANY
OTHER CONDITIONS SUCH AS
DIABETES AND INFERTILITY.
TRANS FATS ARE A METABOLIC
POISON.
>> Ifill: IF TRANS FATS HAVE
BEEN IN OUR FOOD FOR MOST OF OUR
LIVES, WHAT SUBSTITUTES FOR
THEM?
THERE WAS A REASON WHY THEY WERE
THERE IN THE FIRST PLACE.
I ASSUME TO EXTEND SHELF LIFE
FOR GOODS AND PRESERVE THEM.
WHAT TAKES THEIR PLACE?
>> THERE IS NO SINGLE SUBSTITUTE
FOR TRANS FAT.
IT DEPENDS WHAT YOU'RE DOING
WITH I THE TRANS FATS.
LIQUID VEGETABLE OILS WORK
PERFECTLY WELL, AND THE
RESTAURANT INDUSTRY HAS VERY
COMPLETELY SWITCHED OVER TO
TRANS FAT-FREE OILS FOR DEEP
FRYING.
FOR BAKING AND SOME OF OTHER
TIMES OF COOKING, IT'S A LITTLE
MORE COMPLICATED BUT THERE ARE
MANY ALTERNATIVES TO TRANS FATS,
SOMETIMES STILL LIQUID VEGETABLE
OILS WORK PERFECTLY FINE.
SOMETIMES A LITTLE BIT OF PALM
OIL OR A LITTLE BIT OF COCONUT
FAT WILL BE NEEDED IF THERE'S A
CRISPINESS THAT'S AN IMPORTANT
PART OF THAT FOOD.
>> Ifill: FINALLY-- PARDON
ME-- FINALLY THE F.D.A. SAYS
THERE'S A THREE-YEAR CLOCK ON
THIS, THAT THIS IS INDEED,
POISON, THE WORD YOU USED YNOT
MAKE IT IMMEDIATE?
>> THIS WAS A BIT OF A
COMPROMISE.
PARTS OF THE INDUSTRY PUSHED
BACK QUITE HARD AGAINST MORE
IMMEDIATE TRANS FAT BAN.
HOPEFULLY, I THINK INDUSTRIES,
MANY INDUSTRIES WILL TAKE-- SEE
THE WRITING ON THE WALL AND GET
TRANS FATS OUT OF THEIR PRODUCTS
WELL BEFORE THAT THREE YEARS.
>> Ifill: DR. WALTER WILLETT,
CHAIR OF THE OF DEPARTMENT OF
NUTRITION AT THE HARVARD SCHOOL
OF PUBLIC HEALTH, THANK YOU VERY
MUCH.
>> GOOD EVENING.
>> Woodruff: NEXT, WE LAUNCH AN
OCCASIONAL SERIES WE ARE CALLING
"FOOD, GLORIOUS FOOD," REPORTS
ABOUT WHAT WE EAT, HOW OUR FOOD
IS GROWN, AND THE ECONOMICS OF
PUTTING A MEAL ON THE TABLE.
TONIGHT, WE BEGIN WITH FOOD
WASTE, MUCH OF WHAT IS GROWN ON
AMERICAN FARMS NEVER GETS TO
MARKET.
ALLISON AUBREY OF NATIONAL
PUBLIC RADIO HAS OUR REPORT.
THIS STORY IS PART OF THE
NEWSHOUR'S ONGOING COLLABORATION
WITH N.P.R.
>> Reporter: IN SALINAS VALLEY,
CALIFORNIA IT'S A SYMPHONY OF
SOUND, AS THE GROWING SEASON
GETS UNDERWAY, THIS FERTILE
STRIP PRODUCES 70% OF OUR LEAFY
GREENS, IT'S BEEN DUBBED THE
SALAD BOWL OF AMERICA.
BUT NOT EVERYTHING GROWN HERE
MAKES IT TO OUR PLATES.
IN FACT, SOME OF IT NEVER LEAVES
SALINAS.
AT A LOCAL SOLID WASTE DUMP,
OPERATIONS MANAGER, CESAR ZUNIGA
WATCHES, AS TRUCKS ROLL IN EVERY
DAY TO DUMP PRODUCE DESTINED FOR
A NEARBY LANDFILL.
>> WE GOT A WHOLE LOAD OF LOOSE
ORGANIC LETTUCE WE'VE GOT SOME
SPINACH TOWARDS THE BACK.
LOOKS LIKE IT'S PERFECTLY FINE
NOTHING WRONG WITH IT.
SEE WE GOT SOME KALE HERE WE'VE
GOT BROCCOLI IN THE BACK AS
WELL.
WE GOT PLENTY OF PRODUCE TO MAKE
A SALAD HERE.
>> Reporter: THE GREENS IN THIS
LANDFILL ARE FROM LOCAL FARMS
AND SOMETIMES THEY END UP HERE
BECAUSE SOMETHING GOES WRONG
DURING THE PACKAGING PROCESS.
ANOTHER REASON WHY PERFECTLY
GOOD FOOD GETS WASTED, PETER
LEHNER FROM THE NATURAL
RESOURCES DEFENSE COUNCIL
EXPLAINS.
>> RIGHT NOW, FOOD THAT ISN'T
SOLD TO THE BEST BUYERS IS OFTEN
DUMPED IN THE LANDFILL.
THE PRICES FOR FRESH FRUITS AND
VEGETABLES CAN GO UP AND DOWN
QUITE A BIT, FARMERS MAY PLANT
THINKING THEY'LL GET ONE PRICE,
BUT BY THE TIME HARVEST COMES
AROUND, THERE'S ANOTHER PRICE
AND IT'S NOT EVEN WORTH
TRANSPORTING.
>> Repter:or A REPORT BY THE
NATURAL RESOURCES DEFENSE
COUNCIL SAYS THAT AS MUCH AS 40%
OF ALL THE FOOD PRODUCED IN THE
UNITED STATES NEVER GETS EATEN.
>> THE IDEA THAT ALMOST HALF OF
OUR FOOD IS WASTED IS CRAZY.
>> Reporter: THAT WASTE OCCURS
AT EVERY POINT ALONG THE FOOD
CHAIN.
SOME IS LOST IN TRANSPORT AND
DURING FOOD PROCESSING.
SUPERMARKETS AND WE THE
CONSUMERS END UP TOSSING OUT A
LOT TOO.
BUT WHAT ABOUT WHAT'S LOST ON
THE FARM: THE N.R.D.C.'S REPORT
FOUND THAT ANYWHERE FROM ONE TO
30% OF FARMERS CROPS DON'T MAKE
IT TO MARKET.
WE TOURED OCEAN MIST FARMS WITH
ART BARRIENTOS TO FIND OUT WHY.
>> THIS CAULIFLOWER HERE.
YOU SEE HOW IT JUST HAS THAT
YELLOW TINGE TO IT THIS IS NOT
MARKETABLE.
>> Reporter: JUST BECAUSE THE
COLOR IS A BIT OFF?
>> BECAUSE IT'S YELLOW.
THIS WILL NOT BE PACKED.
>> Reporter: IT'S GOT TO BE
EVERY BIT AS NUTRITIOUS AS THE
WHITE CAULIFLOWER DOWN HERE IN
THE FIELD.
WHAT'S WRONG WITH--
>> THERE ISN'T ANYTHING WRONG
WITH IT.
LET ME CUT, GRAB THAT.
>> DOES IT TASTE SWEET?
>> Reporter: IT'S CRUNCHY, IT'S
TASTY.
TASTES LIKE ANY OTHER
CAULIFLOWER I'VE EVER HAD.
AS CONSUMERS ARE WE JUST
SHOPPING WITH OUR EYEBALLS AND
FORGETTING ABOUT OUR TASTE BUDS?
>> ABSOLUTELY!
AS CONSUMERS, WE WANT WHITE
CAULIFLOWER THAT'S WHAT WE
EXPECT FROOUR M GROCER.
>> Reporter: AND AS A RESULT IT
GETS WASTED?
>> AS A RESULT IT GETS
INCORPORATED BACK INTO THE
GROUND WE WON'T HARVEST IT.
>> Reporter: WHAT'S ANOTHER
ISSUE THAT MIGHT DING SOMETHING
OUT OF THE MARKET PLACE?
>> SIZE.
SIZE IS CRITICAL.
>> THIS HEAD OF CAULIFLOWER HERE
IS TOO BIG.
>> Reporter: TOO BIG?
SO YOU HAVE TO MEET THESE VERY
SPECIFIC SIZE STIPULATIONS?
>> YES AND THIS IS TOO BIG.
>> Reporter: IT'S REALLY KIND OF
SHOCKING TO ME.
>> WELL, YES IT CAN BE.
>> Reporter: SIZE MATTERS
BECAUSE RETAILERS DEMAND
UNIFORMITY, WHEN EVERYTHING IS
STACKED UP NICELY IT MAKES FOR
BETTER EYE CANDY.
LIKE THIS PERFECTLY SIZED
CAULIFLOWER THAT IS BEING
WRAPPED UP DESTINED FOR THE
PRODUCE AISLE.
THE YELLOW REJECTS AND HEADS
DEEMED TOO BIG OR TOO SMALL ARE
LEFT BEHIND IN THE FIELD TO BE
PLOWED UNDER.
AND IF YOU THINK BROCCOLI AND
CAULIFLOWER HAVE A TOUGH TIME
MAKING THE GRADE.
CHECK OUTHESE T PEACHES.
>> IF YOU LOOK AT THIS PEACH ALL
THE WAY AROUND IT'S GOT NO
BLEMISHES TO IT, IT'S GOT A RED
COLOR WITH A YELLOW BLUSH
BACKGROUND.
THAT'S GOING TO GO TO OUR
PREMIUM BOX THE HIGH END
RETAILER.
THIS ONE RIGHT HERE HAS GOT A
LITTLE GREEN ON IT SO IT'S
DEFINITELY A NUMBER TWO, WE
WOULDN'T PACK PUT THIS IN A
PREMIUM BOX.
>> Reporter: BACK THAT UP.
PREMIUM GRADE.
WOULD YOU BUY THESE SECONDS?
>> Reporter: AND THE ONES THAT
DON'T EVEN RATE AS A ONE OR TWO.
DUMPED INTO THIS TRUCK.
>> THIS TRUCK HERE IS OUR FINAL
THROWING OUT GOING TO THE CATTLE
FEED.
>> Reporter: SO THINK OF
EVERYTHING THAT WENT INTO
GROWING THESE CROPS: THE WATER,
THE FERTILIZER, THE FUEL TO RUN
THE TRACTOR, BUT ULTIMATELY IF
THESE CROPS DON'T MEASURE UP TO
STANDARDS THEY'RE JUST PLOWED
UNDER RIGHT HERE IN THE FIELD
AND ALL THAT ENERGY IS WASTED.
>> 80% OF OUR WATER, 10% OF OUR
ENERGY, 40% OF OUR LAND IS USED
TO GROW OUR FOOD.
>> Reporter: AND WHEN IT ENDS UP
IN A LANDFILL.
LEHNER SAYS THERE'S ANOTHER
PROBLEM.
>> NOW FOOD IS THE LARGEST
MATERIAL IN OUR LANDFILLS.
OF ALL THE THINGS THAT ARE IN
OUR DUMPS.
THE BIGGEST PORTION IS FOOD.
WHEN IT ROTS IT EMITS METHANE,
WHICH IS A VERY POTENT GREEN
HOUSE GAS, MAYBE 30 OR 100 TIMES
MORE POTENT THAN CARBON DIOXIDE.
>> Reporter: BUT THERE ARE SOME
SOLUTIONS ON THE HORIZON, OCEAN
MIST AND H.M.C. FARMS DONATE
SOME OF THEIR LESS THAN PERFECT
PRODUCE TO THE CALIFORNIA FOOD
BANKS.
LAST YEAR OCEAN MIST SENT NEARLY
400,000 POUNDS OF BROCCOLI AND
CAULIFLOWER AND SOME OF IT ENDS
UP HERE AT THIS WAREHOUSE IN SAN
FRANCISCO, IT CAN STORE SEVEN
SQUARE MILES OF PRODUCE.
PAUL ASH OVERSEES THE OPERATION.
HE SAYS IN THE LAST DECADE THE
CALIFORNIA ASSOCIATION OF FOOD
BANKS HAS DOUBLED THE AMOUNT OF
PRODUCE IT DISTRIBUTES.
>> THIS YEARWE H, OPE TO GROW
THE CALIFORNIA FARM TO FAMILY
PROGRAM BY OVER 70 MILLION
POUNDS.
AND PART OF THAT WILL MEAN MORE
PRODUCE FOR CALIFORNIA FOOD
BANKS.
BUT WE HOPE PART OF IT ALSO
MEANS WE'LL BE ABLE TO PUSH THIS
EASTWARD TO OTHER FOOD BANKS.
>> Reporter: THE FOOD BANKS FARM
TO FAMILY PROGRAM HAS TRIED TO
RECRUIT MORE GROWERS, WHO PACK
IN THE FIELD, TO DO WHAT OCEAN
MIST DOES, THEY SEPARATE OUT THE
SECONDS AND PACK IT IN THESE
BLACK CRATES HEADED FOR THE FOOD
BANK.
THE PREMIUM HEADS GET PACKED IN
THE OCEAN MIST BOXES HEADED FOR
RETAILERS.
IT'S A SIMPLE PROCESS BUT ONLY
THREE OUT OF 25 BROCCOLI AND
CAULIFLOWER GROWERS IN THE STATE
PARTICIPATE.
HAROLD MCCLARTY OF H.M.C. FARMS
SAYS HE'D LIKE TO DONATE MORE OF
HIS PEACHES TO THE FOOD BANKS
BUT--
>> GETTING IT INTO THE HANDS OF
SOMEONE TO EAT ISN'T FREE.
THERE'S GOT TO BE AN ECONOMIC
INCENTIVE TO MOVE MORE OF THIS
INTO AN AVENUE, THAT FOOD BANKS
COULD TAKE ADVANTAGE OF.
IT'S A LOT EASIER AND CHEAPER
JUST TO BASICALLY THROW IT AWAY.
>> Reporter: THE STATE OF
CALIFORNIA DOES OFFER FARMERS
TAX CREDITS TO DONATE PRODUCE,
BUT ASH SAYS THE FOOD BANKS ARE
LOBBYING FOR BIGGER DEDUCTIONS.
THERE ARE ONLY SIX OTHER STATES
BESIDES CALIFORNIA, THAT GIVE
TAX BREAKS TO GROWERS FOR
DONATING FOOD.
>> FIFTY MILLION AMERICANS,
DON'T KNOW WHERE THEIR NEXT MEAL
IS COMING FROM.
WE MEANWHILE ARE WASTING ALL
THIS FOOD.
IF WE CUT FOOD WASTE EVEN BY ONE
THIRD THERE WOULD BENOUG EH FOOD
FOR ALL THOSE PEOPLE WHO DON'T
KNOW WHERE THEIR NEXT MEAL IS
COMING FROM TO BE FULLY FED.
>> Reporter: AS FOOD BANKS WORK
TO EXPAND THEIR PROGRAMS SOME
ENTREPRENEURS SAY THERE ARE SO
MANY SECONDS TO GO AROUND THEY
SEE A WHOLE NEW BUSINESS MODEL.
MUCH LIKE WHAT A FRENCH
SUPERMARKET DID LAST YEAR.
>> WE LAUNCHED LES FRUIT ET
LEGUMES MOCHE, STARRING THE
GROTESQUE APPLE, THE RIDICULOUS
POTATO.
>> Reporter: AND IT WORKED.
>> OUR NEW KIND OF FRUITS AND
VEGETABLES WERE AN IMMEDIATE
SUCCESS, WE FACED ONLY ONE
PROBLEM, BEING SOLD OUT.
>> Reporter: HERE IN THE U.S.
ENTREPRENEUR BEN SIMON AND TWO
OTHER AMERICANS ARE BETTING THEY
CAN TURN AMERICANS ON TO LESS-
THAN-PERFECT PRODUCE.
>> WE'RE WORKING HARD TO LAUNCH
A VENTURE CALLED IMPERFECT.
YOU GET A BOX OF SEASONAL UGLY
PRODUCE DELIVERED TO YOUR DOOR
EVERY WEEK AND BECAUSE THIS
PRODUCE LOOKS A LITTLE FUNKY ON
THE OUTSIDE YOU GET IT FOR 30 TO
50% LESS.
>> Reporter: IMPERFECT PLANS TO
START DELIVERY IN THE SAN
FRANCISCO AREA SOMETIME THIS
SUMMER AND THEY'VE JUST SIGNED A
DEAL WITH A HIGH-END GROCERY
CHAIN CALLED ALERY'S, WHICH HAS
MORE THAN 100 STORES IN
CALIFORNIA AND NEVADA.
HERE'S RALEY'S MEGAN BURRITT.
>> WHEN THEIR PICKING UP THAT
APPLE WE NEED TO TELL THEM THAT
STORY.
WHETHER IT'S YOU KNOW THESE ARE
THE UNDERDOG APPLES.
WHO DOESN'T LOVE AN UNDERDOG
STORY OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
>> Reporter: WILL AMERICANS
EMBRACE THESE MISFITS AS EASILY
AS THE EUROPEANS HAVE?
RALEY'S IS BETTING THEY WILL.
AND BACK IN SALINAS, CESAR
ZUNIGA IS ANTICIPATING TRAFFIC
WILL PICK UP AS THE GROWING
SEASON HITS FULL SWING.
FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR, I'M
ALLISON AUBREY OF NPR NEWS IN
SALINAS VALLEY.
>> Ifill: AND NOW TO THE LATEST
INSTALLMENT IN OUR SERIES ON THE
CUBAN EVOLUTION.
TONIGHT JEFFREY BROWN EXPLORES
HAVANA'S AGING, AND IN MANY
CASES, CRUMBLING INFRASTRUCTURE
THAT PUTS CUBA'S CULTURE,
CHARACTER AND CHARM AT RISK.
>> Brown: IT IS A CITY OF RARE
VISUAL DEPTH.
LAYERS OF HISTORY TOLD IN ITS
BUILDINGS, A MELDING OF STYLES
THROUGH HUNDREDS OF YEARS,
SPANISH COLONIAL TO MID-20TH
CENTURY MODERNISM.
TODAY, AFTER DECADES OF NEGLECT
AND A SEVERE LACK OF RESOURCES,
SO MUCH OF IT IS CRUMBLING.
>> IT'S OFTEN SAID THAT HAVANA
IS FROZEN IN TIM ANDE, BEING
HERE, THAT FEELS RIGHT.
I'VE NEVER SEEN ANYTHING QUITE
LIKE IT BEFORE.
BUT EVERYONE AGREES THAT CHANGES
ARE NOW COMING TO THE CITY AND
THAT MEAN BIG CHALLENGES AND
DECISIONS AHEAD.
>> Brown: THE MAN CREDITED WITH
PRESERVING LARGE CHUNKS OF
HAVANA AND SAVING HUNDREDS OF
ITS BUILDINGS IS EUSEBIO LEAL.
>> SO, WHAT DO YOU SEE WHEN YOU
WALK THESE STREETS?
WALK THESE STREETS? >> (
translated): I REMEMBER
>> (translated): I
REMEMBER WHAT I SAW BEFORE
RENOVATION.
WHAT I SAW BEFORE RENOVATION.
EVERYTHING WAS RUINED IT WAS
ABANDONED.
>> Brown: THE OFFICIAL "CITY
HISTORIAN," LEAL IS A MAN WHO
THINKS BIG.
THINKS BIG. >> (
translated): HAVANA IS A
>> (translated): HAVANA
IS A CITY LIKE PARIS THAT HAS AN
CITY LIKE PARIS THAT HAS AN
IDENTITY OF ITS OWN.
THEY'VE DONE IT IN PARIS WHERE
THEY'VE PRESERVED THE CHARACTER
OF THE CITY AND HAVANA IS MORE
THAN JUST A CITY, IT'S A KIND OF
STATE OF MIND.
>> Brown: LEAL HATCHED A PLAN
DECADES AGO, AND THEN GOT CUBAN
LEADERS TO SIGN ON, TO FIX UP
AND RESTORE A HANDFUL OF HOTELS
IN "OLD HAVANA" AND FUNNEL PART
OF THE PROCEEDS, MORE THAN $100
MILLION A YEAR, BACK INTO OTHER
BUILDINGS.
USING TOURISM, IN EFFECT, TO
BEAUTIFY AND MAINTAIN THE CITY.
PART OF THE CITY IS STILL
RUINED?
>> YES, BUT IT'S THERE, IT'S
STILL THERE AND THAT'S WHAT IS
IMPORTANT.
>> Reporter: ONLY IN THE LAST
FIVE YEARS HAVE CUBANS BEEN
LEGALLY ALLOWED TO BUY A
PROPERTY, AND FEW CAN AFFORD
SUCH A LUXURY.
THAT'S MEANT LITTLE INCENTIVE OR
RESOURCES FOR UPDATING HOMES.
MANY PEOPLE LIVE IN BUILDINGS
WITHOUT PLUMBING OR ELECTRICITY.
>> I LIVE IN BAD CONDITIONS, I
LIVE IN A BUILDING THAT IS
ALMOST CRUSHED, AND IT'S VERY
DANGEROUS.
>> Brown: NESTOR MACHADO LIVES
IN ONE OF HAVANA'S GRAND
BUILDINGS IN SERIOUS DECLINE.
>> IT HAS SEVEN ARCHITECTURAL
STYLES, TOURISTS PASS ALL THE
TIME, AND THEY WANT TO TAKE GOOD
PICTURES, YOU KNOW, BECAUSE IT
CAUGHT THEIR ATTENTION, BUT THE
PROBLEM IS IT IS ALMOST
CRUSHING.
>> THIS IS BUILDING MY FATHER
DESIGNED.
>> Brown: ROSA LOWINGER WAS BORN
IN CUBA BUT CAME TO THE U.S.
WITH HER FAMILY AS A YOUNG GIRL.
AN ART CONSERVATOR, SHE RETURNS
THESE DAYS TO LEAD TOURS OF
HAVANA'S HISTORIC ARCHITECTURE.
>> IF DEVELOPERS HAD COME IN
HERE IN THE EARLY 60'S,
SOMETHING THAT IS THIS LOW, IN
THIS NEIGHBORHOOD, WOULD HAVE
BEEN GONE--
IT WAS AN ACCIDENT OF HISTORY
THAT IT ALL STILL STANDS.
>> WHAT THE REVOLUTION DID IS
STOP DEVELOPMENT, AND WHEN YOU
STOP DEVELOPMENT YOU STOP
DESTRUCTION THAT IS DELIBERATE.
>> Brown: NOW, SAYS LOWINGER,
WITH CUBA POISED TO OPEN ITS
DOORS MORE TO U.S. TOURISM AND
INDUSTRY, DEVELOPMENT IS LIKELY
TO COME.
BUT, WHAT KIND, AND WITH WHAT
IMPACT?
>> THE ISSUES NOW, IS WHAT YOU
SEE AROUND YOU, YOU SEE DECADES
OF DEFERRED MAINTENANCE, YOU SEE
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT'S FALLING
APART, CRACKED BUILDINGS, DIRT
CORROSION, BUT TO MEHAT TIS NOT
NEARLY AS POTENTIALLY
DESTRUCTIVE AS WHAT CAN HAPPEN
IF DEVELOPERS COME IN HERE, AND
THEY DON'T PROTECT THE CITY.
>> Brown: AMERICAN TOURISTS WE
MET HERE OFFERED A COMMON
REFRAIN.
>> I WANTED TO SEE IT UNTOUCHED,
AND I JUST HEARD SO MUCH ABOUT
THE BEAUTIFUL ARCHITECTURE, AND
THE WONDERFUL PEOPLE, AND THE
ART, AND THE MUSIC.
I HOPE IT DOESN'T GET OVERRUN BY
AMERICANS.
YOU KNOW YOU DON'T WANT TO SEE A
STARBUCKS AND MCDONALDS ON EVERY
CORNER.
>> Brown: BUT CUBANS LIKE DARIO
FIGUEROA WOULDN'T MIND, SAY, A
HOME DEPOT.
WE FOUND HIM AT WORK MAKING
REPAIRS TO A NEIGHBOR'S HOUSE.
AND HE ECHOED A COMMON COMPLAINT
ABOUT LIFE HERE, WHERE SUPPLIES
ARE SO LIMITED, STORES SO POORLY
STOCKED.
STOCKED. >> (translated
): YOU'VE GOT TO
>> (translated): YOU'VE
GOT TO DO A LOT OF WORK TO GET
THE
DO A LOT OF WORK TO GET THE
MATERIALS, BECAUSE WE DON'T HAVE
A CENTRAL MARKET WHERE WE CAN
GET EVERYTHING THAT'S REQUIRED
FOR CONSTRUCTION.
I THINK THERE SHOULD BE ONE BIG
STORE.
>> Brown: ROSA LOWINGER SAYS
THOSE NEEDS MUST BE TAKEN INTO
ACCOUNT.
>> IT'S NOT FAIR TO THE PEOPLE
WHO LIVE HERE TO THINK OF IT AS
A COLLAPSED SPLENDOR, BECAUSE
THEY DESERVE PLUMBING THAT
WORKS, AND AIR CONDITIONING, AND
ELEVATORS THAT DON'T FREEZE,
THAT KIND OF THING, SO I'M NOT A
ROMANTIC ABOUT THAT AT ALL.
>> Brown: ONE KEY, SAYS MARY
JABLONSKI, A CONSERVATOR ON THE
TOUR WHO TEACHES AT COLUMBIA
UNIVERSITY, IS FITTING NEW
BUILDING, EVEN CHAIN STORES,
INTO THE CHARACTER OF THE PLACE,
USING APPROPRIATE MATERIALS.
>> IT'S VERY EASY TO MAKE
MISTAKES, AND IF YOU'RE TOO
AGGRESSIVE IN WHAT YOU REPAIR
YOU CAN ACTUALLY MAKE IT WORSE.
>> Brown: MISTAKES MEANING WHAT?
THE WRONG MATERIAL, THE WRONG
STYLE?
>> YES, IF YOU ARE DOING A
REPAIR WITH THE WRONG MATERIAL
IT'LL ACTUALLY ACCELERATE THE
DETERIORATION, AND THAT'S A HUGE
CONCERN.
NOT EVERY BUILDING CAN BE SAVED.
THAT'S A DREAM.
THAT'S NOT GOING TO HAPPEN.
BUT LET'S SAY YOU'VE GOT SEVENTY
PERCENT SAVED, THERE'S ROOM TO
PUT IN THINGS LIKE HOME DEPOTS.
>> Brown: CITY HISTORIAN EUSEBIO
LEAL TOLD ME HE WELCOMES THE NEW
OPENING BETWEEN CUBA AND THE
U.S.
HE THINKS, DONE PROPERLY,
DEVELOPMENT OF HIS BELOVED CITY
CAN BE DONE IN A WAY THAT WORKS
FOR EVERYONE.
BUT THERE'S A LONG ROAD AHEAD.
>> IF I COME HERE IN FIVE YEARS,
TEN YEARS, 20 YEARS, WILL I SEE
STARBUCKS, WILL I SEE MCDONALDS,
WILL I SEE BRANDS FROM, AS I
WOULD IN ANY OTHER CITY?
WOULD IN ANY OTHER CITY? >>
(translated): THEY WILL
>> (translated): THEY
WILL HAVE TO BE FIT INTO WHAT
EXISTS.
HAVE TO BE FIT INTO WHAT EXISTS.
WE WILL HAVE TO MAKE THESE FIT
INTO THE BEAUTY OF HAVANA.
>> Reporter: BUT WILL SOME
>> Brown: BUT WILL SOME
NEIGHBORHOODS OF THE CITY HAVE
TO BE TORN DOWN AND NEW
DEVELOPMENT, NEW BUILDINGS
BROUGHT IN?
>> ( translated ): FOR SURE
THERE ARE PLACES THAT NEED A
COMPLETE RENOVATION, A TOTAL
CHANGE.
BUT WE'LL NEED TO KEEP THE
CHARACTER OF VAHANNAH.
PEOPLE SAY TO ME, "YOU'VE SAVED
HAVANA."
AND I HAVE NOT
I'VE DONE A LITTLE BIT OF WHAT
NEEDS TO BE DONE. AND PEOPLE SAY
TO ME, "WHAT WOULD YOU NEED TO
MAKE IT HAPPEN?"
AND I WOULD NEED ANOTHER LIFE,
PERHAPS A THIRD LIFE, TO GET
DONE WHAT NEEDS TO HAPPEN.
>> Brown: FROM HAVANA, I'M
JEFFREY BROWN FOR THE PBS
NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: TOMORROW IN PART THREE
OF THE CUBAN EVOLUTION, A LOOK
AT TECHNOLOGY AND ACCESS TO THE
INTERNET.
>> THE CUBAN GOVERNMENT SAYS 25%
OF ITS CITIZENS HAVE INTERNET
ACCESS.
WATCHDOG GROUPS LIKE FREEDOM
HOUSE PUT THE NUMBER ABLE TO
LINK TO A FREE ASK OPEN INTERNET
FAR LOWER, AT AROUND 5%.
EITHER WAY, IT'S ONE OF THE
LOWEST RATES IN THE WESTERN
HEMISPHERE.
>> Ifill: ONLINE, WE HAVE MANY
MORE IMAGES OF THE BEAUTY, AND
DECAY, OF HAVANA.
NEWSHOUR PRODUCER FRANK CARLSON
ALSO TRAVELED TO CUBA TO REPORT
THIS SERIES, AND YOU CAN SEE A
PHOTO GALLERY OF HIS WORK, AT
pbs.org/newshour.
>> Woodruff: TODAY WE CONTINUE
WITH THE STORY OF THE OYLER
SCHOOL IN CINCINNATI, OHIO.
IT'S PART OF A GROWING NATIONAL
EFFORT TO SURROUND KIDS AT
SCHOOL.
WITH THE KIND OF SUPPORT THEY
MAY NOT BE GETTING AT HOME.
AT OYLER, THAT INCLUDES FREE
FOOD, CLOTHING, AND HEALTH CARE.
OYLER SERVES KIDS FROM PRESCHOOL
THROUGH THE 12TH GRADE.
IT HAS HUNDREDS OF VOLUNTEER
TUTORS AND MENTORS, AND COLLEGE
ADVISERS.
AND ALL OF THIS IS AIMED AT
ENDING A DROPOUT EPIDEMIC IN ITS
TRADITIONALLY URBAN APPALACHIAN
NEIGHBORHOOD.
TODAY, AMY SCOTT, EDUCATION
CORRESPONDENT FOR AMERICAN
PUBLIC MEDIA'S MARKETPLACE,
BRINGS US THE STORY OF ONE OYLER
STUDENT AIMING TO BE THE FIRST
IN HER FAMILY TO GRADUATE.
>> Reporter: RAVEN GRIBBINS GREW
UP IN LOWER PRICE HILL, ONE OF
CINCINNATI'S POOREST
NEIGHBORHOODS.
NOW IN HER SENIOR YEAR, SHE'S
BEEN AT OYLER SCHOOL SINCE
KINDERGARTEN.
>> IT'S BEEN ROUGH, BUT IT'S
BEEN OKAY, TOO.
EVERYBODY USED TO TELL ME YOU'RE
NOT GOING TO MAKE IT THROUGH
HIGH SCHOOL.
YOU'RE GOING TO HAVE A BABY BY
16.
SO I'M GLAD TO PROVE ALL THEM
WRONG.
I AIN'T PLANNING ON GETTING A
JOB AFTER GRADUATION.
I PLAN ON GOING TO COLLEGE.
>> OKAY.
>> Reporter: RAVEN'S
GRANDPARENTS AND HER FATHER ALL
WENT TO OYLER.
NONE OF THEM GRADUATED FROM HIGH
SCHOOL.
>> HOW WAS YOUR DAY AT SCHOOL?
>> IT WAS GOOD.
>> DO YOU HAVE ANY HOMEWORK?
>> UM, NO, YES.
I DO.
>> SO YOU GOTTA DO YOUR
HOMEWORK.
>> I WANT TO MAKE SOMETHING WITH
MY LIFE.
IF MY MOM AND DAD WOULD HAVE HAD
A HIGH SCHOOL DIPLOMA, THEIR
LIFE WOULD BE WAY DIFFERENNOW.T
MY MOM, SHE WAS IN AND OUT OF
JAIL A LOT.
SHE HAD A DRUG PROBLEM.
SHE USED TO PROSTITUTE ALSO.
I TALK TO HER EVERY ONCE IN A
WHILE.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT'S GOING ON
NOW.
MY FATHER, HE COULD NOT READ OR
WRITE, SO THAT'S WHAT MESSED HIM
UP.
>> I'M A MAINTENANCE MAN.
I DO CONSTRUCTION.
NOT HAVING AN EDUCATION
SOMETIMES WORK'S HARD TO FIND.
YOU KNOW, YOU STRUGGLE.
>> I HAD MOVED IN WITH MY DAD
BECAUSE A LOT OF PROBLEMS THAT
BEEN GOING ON.
>> SHE WANTED TO COME UP AND
STAY BECAUSE IT WAS GETTING A
LITTLE ROUGH, A LITTLE VIOLENT.
I LIVED UP HERE, AND IT'S A
TLE QUIETER.
>> THIS IS MINE AND MY LITTLE
SISTER'S ROOM, WE SHARE.
>> WE KIND OF HAD, GROWING UP, A
ROCKY RELATIONSHIP, AND I GOT
HOOKED ON COCAINE PRETTY BAD,
AND ALCOHOL.
AND THEY TOOK RAVEN AWAY FROM
ME.
MY MOTHER AND FATHER RAISED HER
FOR ME.
BUT NOW TODAY THAT I'M CLEAN AND
SOBER, I GOT A SECOND CHANCE, AN
OPPORTUNITY TO SPEND THIS LAST
YEAR WITH HER.
SHE'S GOING TO GRADUATE FROM
HIGH SCHOOL.
HOPEFULLY SHE'LL GO TO COLLEGE.
I MEAN I'M REALLY HOPING.
SHE SAYS SHE IS, BUT I HOPE SHE
AT LEAST GIVES IT A CHANCE.
>> Reporter: WHY'D YOU MAKE THAT
FACE?
>> BECAUSE I'M GOING TO GO TO
COLLEGE.
SO I CAN HAVE A BETTER LIFE THAN
THEY HAD.
>> Reporter: RAVEN HAS A LOT OF
SUPPORT.
HER SCHOOL IS KNOWN AS A
COMMUNITY LEARNING CENTER, WITH
RESOURCES LIKE HEALTH CARE AND
FREE FOOD AND CLOTHES.
>> IN THEORY THERE SHOULD BE NO
KID NOT GETTING FULL SERVICES
HERE.
AND IF THEY'RE NOT, THEN WE'RE
GOING TO ADDRESS IT PRETTY
QUICKLY.
>> OKAY, NOW WATCH THIS HERE.
DO YOU SEE THAT ANIMAL?
CAN YOU TELL WHAT IT IS?
>> A CAT?
>> MM-HMM.
YOU'RE A SENIOR THIS YEAR,
RIGHT?
AND ARE YOU PLANNING TO GO TO
SCHOOL NEXT YEAR?
WHERE ARE YOU LOOKING AT GOING
TO SCHOOL?
>> I WANT TO GO TO MOUNT ST.
JOSEPH.
>> OH NICE.
>> AND BE A MATH TEACHER.
>> WOW, THAT'S AWESOME!
>> I'VE KNOWN RAVEN HER ENTIRE
LIFE.
SHE IS HARD-HEADED.
SHE IS ALSO HIGHLY INTELLIGENT,
HIGHLY MOTIVATED.
I WORRY ABOUT HER.
I WORRY ABOUT ALL OF THEM.
SHE'S THE EPITOME OF WHAT OUR
YOUNG LADIES GO THROUGH DOWN
HERE.
ONE DAY SHE MIGHT HAVE HER DRUG-
ADDICTED AUNTS' KIDS.
TAKING CARE OF THEM.
THE NEXT DAY SHE'LL BE HERE
PLAYING BASKETBALL JUST LIKE A
NORMAL HIGH SCHOOL STUDENT IN
ANYTOWN, USA.
WHAT SCARES ME IS THAT, IF SHE
GETS AN OPPORTUNITY TO GO AWAY
TO COLLEGE, WILL SHE TAKE IT?
BECAUSE YOU ALWAYS FEEL LIKE
YOU'RE BEING PULLED BACK INTO
YOUR FAMILY'S DRAMA.
>> STAYING OUT OF TROUBLE.
THAT'S GOING TO BE THE BIGGEST
ONE.
>> I'M USED TO SPEAKING MY MIND.
BUT WHEN YOU SPEAK YOUR MIND,
SOMETIMES THAT GETS YOU IN
TROUBLE.
>> TROUBLE LIKE THIS FIGHT WITH
ANOTHER STUDENT FROM HER SCHOOL.
>> I'VE ALWAYS BEEN FEISTY.
I ALWAYS HAD AN ATTITUDE AT SOME
POINT IN TIME.
>> GROWING UP 8TH AND STATE WAS
A REALLY ROUGH NEIGHBORHOOD.
ONE OF THE ROUGHEST IN
CINCINNATI.
WE WAS RAISED TO FIGHT.
>> THIS GIRL, SHE KEPT CALLING
ME ALL TYPES OF BAD NAMES AND
STUFF.
I TOLD HER, I SAID LOOK, YOU'RE
GOING TO EITHER HAVE TO STOP
TALKING ABOUT ME, OR WE'RE GOING
TO HAVE TO FIGHT.
AND SOMEBODY ENDED UP RECORDING
IT AND PUT IT ON YOUTUBE.
>> I ONLY GOT TO PLAY LIKE TWO
MINUTES, BECAUSE HE WAS SO MAD.
>> WHEN YOU'RE MAD, YOU CAN'T
JUST START YELLING.
>> I AM RAVEN'S MENTOR HERE FROM
OYLER.
>> I MEAN, JUST THINK, IF YOU
WERE TO YELL LIKE THAT AT YOUR
BOSS, AND YOU LOSE YOUR JOB.
I SEE HER ABOUT TWO TO THREE
TIMES A MONTH AND WE TALK OR
TEXT ON A REGULAR BASIS.
TRY AND TAKE A DEEP BREATH AND
REMOVE YOURSELF FROM THE
SITUATION.
MY MAJOR FOCUS WITH HER SO FAR,
IS I JUST DON'T WANT TO LET HER
DOWN.
BECAUSE OF HER MOTHER BEING OUT
OF HER LIFE FOR SO MUCH, WHEN I
TELL HER I'M GOING TO DO
SOMETHING, I'M GONNA DO IT.
>> HI RAVEN, I'M ABBY. IT'S SO
GOOD TO MEET YOU.
>> NICE TO MEET YOU TOO.
>> HI, I'M CAITLIN, I'M HER
FORMER COLLEGE ACCESS ADVISER.
>> OKAY, VERY NICE TO MEET YOU.
>> SHE SUBMITTED AN APPLICATION,
RIGHT?
>> MM-HMM.
>> AND WITH AN ACT SCORE FROM
LAST YEAR, RIGHT?
>> MMM-HMM.
>> SO SHE'S WONDERING, WHAT DID
YOU GET ON IT LAST YEAR?
>> 16.
>> OUR AVERAGE ACT SCORE IS A
22.
BUT BY NO MEANS DOES THAT MEAN
THAT EVERYBODY IN THAT RANGE,
ABOVE THAT RANGE GETS IN.
THERE'S PEOPLE BELOW THAT THAT
ALSO GET IN.
CAN YOU TELL ME A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT YOUR G.P.A. AND WHERE
YOU'RE AT IN SCHOOL RIGHT NOW?
>> MY GPA'S A 2.3.
BUT I GOT, LIKE, IT'S GOING UP
THOUGH, CAUSE I GOT STRAIGHT A'S
AND B'S RIGHT NOW.
>> YOU DO?
THAT'S GOOD.
>> YEAH, SO IT'S GOING UP.
>> Reporter: RAVEN STUDIES TO
TAKE THE ACT FOR THE THIRD TIME,
HOPING TO BRING UP HER SCORE.
>> WHENEVER YOU HAVE A QUESTION
AND THEY TALK ABOUT DESCRIBING,
GO BACK TO THAT SECTION AND JUST
START CIRCLING WORDS THAT
DESCRIBE STUFF AND SEE WHICH
ONES MATCH.
THAT WAY YOU CAN SAVE SOME TIME
AND MAKE IT MORE LIKE A DIRECT
ANSWER.
SO HOW ARE YOU FEELING ABOUT IT?
YOU'RE READY?
YEAH.
YOU'RE GONNA BE AWESOME, OKAY.
>> I THINK I DID BETTER ON THIS
ONE THAN ANY OTHER ONE.
I MEAN, I JUST TRIED MY BEST.
IF IT DON'T WORK OUT, THEN IT
DON'T WORK OUT.
>> PENN STATE SENT ME AN EMAIL
SAYING THEY'RE LOOKING FOR NEW
PLAYERS.
THAT THEY REALLY HOPE THAT I
COME OUT ON THEIR RECRUIT DAY
AND TRY OUT.
IT'S GOOD, BUT I'M SCARED I'M
GOING TO GET OUT THERE AND LIKE
FREEZE UP OR SOMETHING.
>> I REALLY LIKE RAVEN.
SHE'S VERY POSITIVE, I THINK SHE
KNOWS WHAT SHE WANTS.
>> I ACTUALLY USED A RECRUITING
WEBSITE AND SAW THAT SHE WAS A
SETTER.
SHE HAD HIGH SCHOOL EXPERIENCE,
AND JUST REACHED OUT TO HER TO
SEE WHAT HER INTEREST LEVEL
MIGHT BE.
SEE IF THERE'S ANY CHANCE THAT
WE WOULD BE A GOOD FIT FOR HER.
>> I REALLY IN MY HEART BELIEVE
THAT RAVEN WILL BE ONE OF THE
STUDENTS WHBREAKSO AWAY FROM
THIS NEIGHBORHOOD A LITTLE BIT,
GETS HERSELF AN EDUCATION.
I DON'T SEE ANY REASON WHY SHE
CAN'T.
>> I LIKE THIS PLACE.
>> TO ME, THIS PLACE FITS YOU.
>> I THINK IT WOULD BE GOOD FOR
ME.
>> AND IT'S ALL RIGHT HERE,
RAVEN.
YOU'RE NOT GOING ANYWHERE.
YOU'RE NOT GOING TO GET LOST.
IT'S ALL RIGHT HERE.
>> Reporter: EVEN BEFORE SHE
GETS HER TEST SCORE BACK, RAVEN
GETS SOME NEWS.
>> DEAR RAVEN, ON BEHALF OF THE
COLLEGE OF MOUNT SAINT JOE'S I'M
PLEASED TO INFORM YOU THAT YOU
HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED AS A STUDENT
BEGINNING 2013 FALL.
ALL RIGHT, NOW WE'VE GOTTA OPEN
THE BIG, BIG ONE.
>> OKAY, CONGRATULATIONS.
I AM PLEASED TO OFFER YOU
ADMINISTRATION TO THE COLLEGE OF
EDUCATIONOR F FALL 2013 AT PENN
STATE GREATER ALLEGHENY.
>> FOUR YEARS AGO, IF I WOULD
HAVE TOLD MYSELF THAT I WAS
GOING TO PENN STATE FOR
VOLLEYBALL, AND STUFF LIKE THAT,
I WOULD HAVE BEEN LIKE, "YOU'RE
CRAZY."
I WOULD NEVER HAVE BELIEVED IT,
BECAUSE I WAS BEING BAD, I WAS
ALWAYS GETTING SUSPENDED, I
WASN'T DOING MY WORK.
I WAS ALWAYS SKIPPING SCHOOL.
SO I NEVER WOULD HAVE BELIEVED
IT IN A MILLION YEARS.
>> RAVEN OLIVIA GRIBBINS.
>> YEAH!
>> I'M PROUD THAT SHE MADE IT,
AND I CAN'T WAIT TO GO SEE HER
GRADUATE FROM COLLEGE.
>> IT'S VERY SPECIAL.
SHE'S THE FIRST ONE TO GRADUATE
FROM HIGH SCHOOL.
>> HAPPY DAY.
>> Woodruff: RAVEN GRIBBINS HAS
JUST FINISHED HER SOPHOMORE YEAR
AT PENN STATE GREATER ALLEGHENY,
OUTSIDE PITTSBURGH.
HER STORY IS PART OF AMY SCOTT'S
DOCUMENTARY, "OYLER," PRODUCED
IN ASSOCIATION WITH AMERICAN
PUBLIC MEDIA'S "MARKETPLACE."
YOU CAN FIND MORE ABOUT IT AT
www.oylerdocumentary.com
>> Ifill: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE, THE ARTIFICIAL SWEETENER
ASPARTAME HAS A BAD RAP, BUT THE
AMERICAN CHEMICAL SOCIETY SETS
THE RECORD STRAIGHT IN A FOUR-
ASPARTAME THE AVERAGE PERSON
WOULD HAVE TO CONSUME 97
PACKETES OF EQUAL WITHIN 24
HOURS TO COME CLOSE TO A LEVEL
DEEMED UNACCEPTABLE BY THE FOOD
AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION.
LEARN MORE FACTS ABOUT THE SWEET
SUBSTANCE, ON OUR HOME PAGE.
THAT'S pbs.org/newshour.
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON WEDNESDAY, THE WOMEN'S
WORLD CUP.
THE FIRST ROUND ENDS ON THE
FIELD, BUT THE CONTROVERSY
CONTINUES OFF IT.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE, AND AGAIN
HERE TORROWMO EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.